Module Overview

    Key University Terms:

        Module: A subject or unit you study.

Semester: The name for a "term" at MMU. There are two per year: Sept-Jan and Jan-July.

You will study 4 modules per semester.

Module Goals:

    This module covers both statistical theory (like the "bell curve") and practical skills in Excel (like forecasting).

The concepts are fundamental and will be built upon in your second and third years.

A major focus is on regression, which the lecturer notes is the main way economists conduct research.

Resources:

    There are 10 lectures in total.

The Moodle site is essential. You can find tutorial answers and a module overview there.

📝 Module Assessment

The module is assessed by two pieces of coursework:

    Task 1 (30% of marks) 

    Task: You'll be given healthcare data for English regions.

Output: You will use Excel to analyze the data and create a PowerPoint presentation with your recommendations on where the NHS should focus financial support.

Task 2 (70% of marks)

    Task: You'll be given data on new car sales from various countries.

Output: You will write an essay, which must include charts, to show your forecast for car production to 2026 and interpret what the future might hold.

🗓️ Lecture & Tutorial Schedule

Here is a breakdown of the topics for the entire module. Note that computer sessions are for practicing the concepts in Excel.
Week	Lecture Topic (Tuesdays)	Small Group Session (Computer Room)
1	

Module Introduction

	

Descriptive Stats: Mean, median, mode; Variance, standard deviation. Excel: Descriptive stats functions.

2	

Graphical analysis tools; Cross-section vs. time-series data.
	

	

Charts: Histograms, bar charts, pie charts. Stats: Inter-quartile range, outliers. Excel: Charts, quartiles, box-and-whisker.

3	

Comparing two variables: Correlation.
	

	

Excel: Correlation. Discussion of Coursework Task 1.

4	

Introduction to probability; Random variables; Probability distributions.
	

	

Excel: Using bar charts to represent probability distributions.

5	

Probability Distributions: Binomial and normal distributions; The central limit theorem.
	

	

Excel: The normal distribution ("bell curve"). Skills: How to create a PowerPoint file.

-	No lecture or computer session	

3rd-7th November is 'Get Career Ready' week

7	

Correlation (revisited); Using XY charts to assess correlation.
	

	

Excel: Correlation and XY charts.

8	

Time-series data; Adding trendlines to charts; Forecasting based on trendlines.
	

	

Excel: Fitting trendlines; Using =forecast.linear.

9	

Regression and Forecasting; Using multiple regression, including with seasonal data.
	

	

Excel: Forecasting with seasonal data; Interpreting regression and statistical significance.

10	

Regression & Statistical Significance ; p-values; Estimating population mean from a sample.
	

	

Excel: Using 'Forecast sheet'; Using forecast.ets; Copying charts to Word.

11	

Revision for Task 2; Looking at answers from previous students.
	

	

Excel: Discussing Coursework Task 2.

💡 Why Study Statistics for Economics?

The lecture highlights that while economic forecasting is more complicated than astronomy , it is arguably more important for society.

    In Business: A manager might use forecasting to decide how many machines to install in a factory. Getting this right benefits consumers and employees; getting it wrong can put the firm in trouble.

In Government: An economist working for the UK government might use data (like birthrates) to plan how many nurses the NHS needs and where in the country they will be needed most.

This module focuses on analyzing data, not on specific economic theories (like Keynesian or Neoclassical economics).

🧮 Core Topic: Descriptive Statistics

This is the main academic subject of Lecture 1. Descriptive statistics are used to summarize and make sense of data , such as the table of UK GDP growth rates.

A 2023 paper by Meade & Driver states that forecasts can be summarized by "measures of location" and "measures of dispersion". This lecture introduces both.

1. Measures of Location (Central Tendency)

This is a single, "typical" number that represents a whole column of data. They are often just called an "average".

    Mean:

        What it is: The most common type of average.

        How to Calculate: Add up all the values and divide by the number of values.

Excel: =AVERAGE(...)

Median:

    What it is: The middle value in a sorted dataset.

    How to Calculate:

        Sort the data (e.g., highest to lowest).

Repeatedly remove the highest and lowest values.

Continue until only one or two values are left. If two values remain, the median is the mean of those two.

Excel: =MEDIAN(...)

Mode:

    What it is: The value that occurs most often.

Note: A dataset might not have a single mode (e.g., if several values appear twice, but no value appears three times).

Excel: =MODE(...)

Which "Average" to Use? Different measures have different advantages:

    Use Mean: When you need a measure that is related to other statistical concepts like variance.

Use Median: When your data has a few extreme values (outliers) or potential typos. The median is more "resilient" to these extremes.

Use Mode: Best for non-continuous data. For example, a shoe shop might use the mode to decide which shoe size to put in the window display.

2. Measures of Dispersion (Variability)

This measures how much variation or "spread" exists in a set of numbers.

    Variance:

        Concept: A common way to measure dispersion. Simply subtracting the mean from each value doesn't work, as the positive and negative differences cancel out, and the total sum is always zero.

How to Calculate:

    First, calculate the mean of your data (e.g., 1.7).

For each value (X) in your data, find its difference from the mean: (X–mean).

Square each of those differences: (X–mean)2. This step is key as it makes all the resulting numbers positive.

Sum (add up) all of these squared differences: ∑(X–mean)2.

Finally, divide this total sum by the number of rows (n): Variance=n∑(X–mean)2​.

    Example from slide: The sum of squared differences was 264.03, and there were 24 rows. So, 264.03/24=11 (approximately).

Excel: =VARP(...)

Standard Deviation:

    Concept: This is another, very common way to measure variation. It is directly related to variance.

Key Fact: If the standard deviation is zero, it means all the numbers in your list are identical.

How to Calculate: It is simply the square root of the variance.

    Example from slide: Variance=11.001. The standard deviation is 11.001​, which is approximately 3.317 .

Excel: =STDEVP(...)

🏁 Lecture Summary

This lecture gave an overview of the module and introduced the foundational concepts of descriptive statistics. You learned about:

    Measures of Location (mean, median, mode) to find a "typical" value.

Measures of Dispersion (variance, standard deviation) to measure the spread in a sample.

These ideas will be practiced in this week's computer lab using Excel.

Would you like a deeper dive into any of these topics, such as the pros and cons of mean vs. median, or a step-by-step example of calculating variance?