📝 Lecture 2: Key Topics

This lecture covers several key areas:

    Data Types: Understanding the different kinds of data you'll work with.

Charts: Identifying and using useful chart types.

Data Variation: Analyzing data spread using quartiles, the inter-quartile range (IQR), and outliers.

📊 1. Understanding Data Types

Before you can analyze data, you must know what type of data it is.

Cross-Section vs. Time-Series Data

Economists typically use one of these two types:

    Cross-Section Data: This is a set of data for one specific point in time (e.g., one year) that covers many different units (e.g., many countries).

Time-Series Data: This is data for one specific unit (e.g., the UK) collected over a period of time (e.g., annual UK data since 2014).

    Note: There is also panel data, which combines both (data for many units over many years) , but this module will not cover it. Your first coursework will use cross-section data , and your second will use time-series data.

Continuous vs. Categorical Data

    Continuous Data: This is numerical data where the value can be anything, often with no practical upper limit. GDP is a good example.

Categorical Data: This is data that fits into one of a few possible categories. Examples include days of the week, type of car, or a city.

    While often labelled with words (e.g., "male", "female") , it's more efficient in Excel to use numbers (e.g., 1 = male, 2 = female).

📈 2. Using Charts to Visualize Data

Charts are essential for revealing insights that are not obvious from tables of data.

Bar Charts vs. Histograms

These two charts look similar but are used for different things.

    Bar Chart

        Use: Used to represent categorical data.

Features: Uses rectangular bars where the length (or height) of the bar is proportional to the value it represents (e.g., total sales).

The example in the slides (Slide 10) shows a bar chart where each bar has the same width.

Histogram

    Use: A graphical representation of data that has been grouped into numerical ranges (or "class intervals").

Features: The area of the bar represents the size of its class interval. This means the bar widths can be different, unlike in the bar chart example.

Histograms can be created directly from continuous data in Excel.

Choosing the Best Chart for Comparisons

The lecture compares UK investment data for 2022 and 2023 using different charts to see which is most effective.

    Two Pie Charts: This method (shown on Slide 13) makes it hard to assess changes between the two years.

Stacked Bar Chart: This chart (Slide 14) was not considered helpful for this specific comparison , but it is good at showing which types of investment are big or small.

100% Stacked Column Chart: This chart (Slide 15) can reveal big changes , but it loses information by making both bars the same total height.

The Best Chart (Slide 17): The lecturer suggests a side-by-side column chart is one of the best for this task.

    It clearly shows that business and government investment increased in 2023.

It also clearly shows that investment in private dwellings hardly changed.

Key Takeaway: The "best" chart depends on what you are studying and partly on personal taste. It's important to spend time choosing the right charts for your essays.

🧮 3. Measuring Variation: Quartiles, IQR, and Outliers

This week's lecture focuses on using the median and interquartile range to understand data, as an alternative to last week's "mean" and "standard deviation" .

Quartiles

Quartiles, along with the median, help us assess the variation (or spread) in a set of data. Quartiles divide your sorted data into four equal parts.

    Lower Quartile (Q1): The 25th percentile. 25% of the data is below this value.

    Median (Q2): The 50th percentile. This is the middle value of the data.

    Upper Quartile (Q3): The 75th percentile. 75% of the data is below this value.

In Excel, you find them using these formulas (assuming your data is in cells D4 to D30):

    Lower Quartile: =QUARTILE(D4:D30, 1) 

Upper Quartile: =QUARTILE(D4:D30, 3)

Using the "UK business investment" data, the lecture finds:

    Upper Quartile (Q3): 208,528 

Median: 156,529

Lower Quartile (Q1): 133,175

Inter-Quartile Range (IQR)

The IQR is a measure of statistical variation and is calculated by subtracting the lower quartile from the upper quartile.

    Formula: IQR = Q3 – Q1 

A smaller IQR means less variation (the data is more bunched together).

Example: Comparing variation in "govt investment" vs. "Invested in private homes":

    Govt Investment:

        Q3 (54,812) - Q1 (26,847) = IQR 27,965 

Investment in Private Homes:

    Q3 (67,610) - Q1 (41,671) = IQR 25,939 

Conclusion: The "Invested in private homes" data has less variation because its IQR is smaller.

Box and Whisker Chart

A box and whisker chart (like the one on Slide 22) is an excellent way to visualize the median, quartiles, and variation all at once.

Outliers

An outlier is a data point that seems very different from most of the other values in the dataset. These can sometimes be the result of typing errors.

You can use the IQR to mathematically identify outliers:

    Find Q1, Q3, and the IQR .

Calculate the "fences":

    Upper Fence: Q3 + (1.5 x IQR) 

Lower Fence: Q1 – (1.5 x IQR)

Any data point above the upper fence or below the lower fence is considered an outlier.

Outliers are often shown as separate dots on a box-and-whisker chart.